Opentelemetry trace support for Triton tracing (#5637)
triton-inference-server/server: docs/user_guide/trace.md

Triton includes that capability to generate a detailed trace for
individual inference requests. Tracing is enable by command-line
arguments when running the tritonserver executable.

Starting in 23.04 release, Triton has one flag `--trace-config` to specify 
global or trace mode specific configuration setting. The format of this flag 

> is `--tracing-config=<trace mode>,<setting>=<value>`, where `<trace mode>` 
> is either `triton` or `opentelemetry`. By default, trace mode is set to `triton`,
> and the server will use the Triton's trace APIs. For `opentelemetry`, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is `--trace-config=<mode>,<setting>=<value>`, where `<mode>` 
is either `triton` or `opentelemetry`. By default, the trace mode is set to `triton`,
and the server will use Triton's trace APIs. For `opentelemetry` mode, 
```

the server will use the [OpenTelemetry's APIs](#opentelemetry-trace-support) to generate, collect and export 
traces for individual inference requests.

To specify global trace settings (level, rate, count, or mode), 

> the format is `--tracing-config=<setting>=<value>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the format is `--trace-config=<setting>=<value>`.
```

An example ussage, which invokes Triton's trace APIs:

```
$ tritonserver --trace-config=triton,file=/tmp/trace.json \
    --trace-config=triton,log-frequency=50 --trace-config=rate=100 \
    --trace-config=level=TIMESTAMPS --trace-config=triton,log-frequency=50 \
    --trace-config=count=100 ...
```

> ## Trace settings
> ### Global settings

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Trace Settings
### Global Settings
```

The following table shows available global trace settings to pass to `--trace-config`

| Setting     | Default Value |  Description                                                                                                                           |
|:------------|:--------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | `rate`      | 1000          | Specifies the sampling rate. The same as deprecated `--trace-rate`. In the above example every 100-th inference request will be traced.|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `rate`      | 1000          | Specifies the sampling rate. The same as deprecated `--trace-rate`. For example, a value of 1000 specifies that every 1000-th inference request will be traced. |
```

| `level`     | OFF           | Indicates the level of trace detail that should be collected and may be specified multiple times to trace multiple informations. The same as deprecated `--trace-level`|
| `count`     | -1            | Specifies the remaining number of traces to be collected. In the example Triton will stop tracing requests after 100 traces are collected. The same as deprecated `--trace-count`. |

> | `mode`      | triton        | Specifies which trace APIs to use for collecting traces. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `mode`      | triton        | Specifies which trace APIs to use for collecting traces. The choices are "triton" or "opentelemetry". |
```

> ### Triton trace APIs settings

Reviewer: Can you add a similar `OpenTelemetry Trace API Settings` table that describes `url` and other relevant fields?

Author: It is on its way.

> ### Triton trace APIs settings

Reviewer: Titlecase for headers
```suggestion
### Triton Trace APIs Settings
```

The following table shows available Triton trace APIs settings for `--trace-config=triton,<setting>=<value>`.

| Setting     | Default Value |  Description                                                                                                                           |
|:------------|:--------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | `file`      |     -         | Indicates where the trace output should be written. The same as deprecated `--trace-file`.|

Reviewer: Default file value is `-` ? Should it be an empty string or some `/tmp` file?

Author: It's empty string. I'll update it. Forgot to change it here

> | `log-frequency`| 0          | Specifies the rate that the traces are written to file. In the example Triton will log to file for every 50 traces collected. The same as deprecated `--trace-log-frequency`|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `log-frequency`| 0          | Specifies the rate that the traces are written to file. For example, a value of 50 specifies that Triton will log to file for every 50 traces collected. The same as deprecated `--trace-log-frequency`|
```

Triton includes that capability to generate a detailed trace for
individual inference requests. Tracing is enable by command-line
arguments when running the tritonserver executable.

`--trace-config` command line option in Triton can be used to specify 
global and trace mode specific config setting.. The format of this flag 
is `--trace-config=<mode>,<setting>=<value>`, where `<mode>` 
is either `triton` or `opentelemetry`. By default, the trace mode is set to `triton`,
and the server will use Triton's trace APIs. For `opentelemetry` mode, 
the server will use the [OpenTelemetry's APIs](#opentelemetry-trace-support) to generate, 
collect and export traces for individual inference requests.

To specify global trace settings (level, rate, count, or mode), 
the format is `--trace-config=<setting>=<value>`.

An example usage, which invokes Triton's trace APIs:

```
$ tritonserver \
    --trace-config=triton,file=/tmp/trace.json \
    --trace-config=triton,log-frequency=50 \
    --trace-config=rate=100 \
    --trace-config=level=TIMESTAMPS \
    --trace-config=count=100 ...
```

## Trace Settings
### Global Settings

> The following table shows available global trace settings to pass to `--trace-config`

Reviewer 2: Having all the flags as part of --trace-config makes sense as even though global, they are configuration of tracer.
I don't think the first equal sign is required. It can be interpreted correctly even with
`--trace-config rate=100`

> The following table shows available global trace settings to pass to `--trace-config`

Reviewer 2: We can probably update the documentation of the cli examples below.

> The following table shows available global trace settings to pass to `--trace-config`

Author: I think it make sense to move to one flag for same reasons as @tanmayv25 mentioned. With back to back `=` not required, it became eye-pleasant, and by eliminating separate global flags, users don't need to remember different flag names just to specify trace configuration.

It is also easier from user's side to check how many flags is set. If they have a large number of flags specified, by searching for `--trace-config` they can highlight all trace-related flags and count them for example

> The following table shows available global trace settings to pass to `--trace-config`

Reviewer 3: I think it should be fine to use `--trace-config`.

| Setting     | Default Value |  Description                                                                                                                           |
|:------------|:--------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | `rate`      | 1000          | Specifies the sampling rate. The same as deprecated `--trace-rate`. For example, a value of 1000 specifies that every 1000-th inference request will be traced. |

Reviewer 3: It seems like it is rendered incorrectly now: 
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/10105175/232828232-a0ec00f2-dd19-4579-81aa-4509b160bc3b.png)

> | `rate`      | 1000          | Specifies the sampling rate. The same as deprecated `--trace-rate`. For example, a value of 1000 specifies that every 1000-th inference request will be traced. |

Author: I thought the line separation can still be clear. Meaning next line in the description belongs to the setting, specified earlier.

> | `rate`      | 1000          | Specifies the sampling rate. The same as deprecated `--trace-rate`. For example, a value of 1000 specifies that every 1000-th inference request will be traced. |

Author: Updating table style

> | `rate`      | 1000          | Specifies the sampling rate. The same as deprecated `--trace-rate`. For example, a value of 1000 specifies that every 1000-th inference request will be traced. |

Reviewer 3: Looks great! Thanks resolving.

| `mode`      | triton        | Specifies which trace APIs to use for collecting traces. The choices are "triton" or "opentelemetry". |

### Triton Trace APIs Settings

The following table shows available Triton trace APIs settings for `--trace-config=triton,<setting>=<value>`.

| Setting     | Default Value |  Description                                                                                                                           |
|:------------|:--------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `file`      | empty string  | Indicates where the trace output should be written. The same as deprecated `--trace-file`.|
| `log-frequency`| 0          | Specifies the rate that the traces are written to file. For example, a value of 50 specifies that Triton will log to file for every 50 traces collected. The same as deprecated `--trace-log-frequency`|

> In addition to configure trace settings for Triton trace APIs 
> in command line arguments, users may modify the trace setting when Triton server
> is running via the trace APIs, more information can be found in [trace
> protocol](../protocol/extension_trace.md). This option is currently not supported,
> when trace mode is set to `opentelemetry`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In addition to the trace configuration settings in the command line, you can
modify the trace configuration using the [trace
protocol](../protocol/extension_trace.md). This option is currently not supported,
when trace mode is set to `opentelemetry`.
```

Author: updated

    scheduling.

  * BACKEND_OUTPUT: The tensor in the response of a backend.

## Opentelemetry trace support

> Starting with 23.04 release triton provides an option to generate and export traces, 
> using [Opentelemetry APIs and SDKs](https://opentelemetry.io/). Currently this option is
> only supported for Ubuntu based systems and does not support tracing for bls models.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Starting with the 23.04 release, Triton provides an option to generate and export traces 
using [Opentelemetry APIs and SDKs](https://opentelemetry.io/). Currently this option is
only supported for Ubuntu based systems and does not support tracing for 
[BLS](https://github.com/triton-inference-server/python_backend/tree/main#business-logic-scripting) models.
```

> To specify Opentelemetry as a tracing APIs, specify --trace-config flag as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To specify Opentelemetry mode for tracing, specify the `--trace-config` flag as follows:
```

```
$ tritonserver --trace-config=mode=opentelemetry ...
```

> At the moment, triton supports HTTP Exporter, provided by Opentelemetry. The endpoint 

Reviewer: Add hyperlink to HTTP Exporter

can be specified as follows:
```

> $ tritonserver --trace-config=mode=opentelemetry --trace-config=opentelemetry,url=<your endpoint> ...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ tritonserver --trace-config=mode=opentelemetry --trace-config=opentelemetry,url=<endpoint> ...
```

    scheduling.

  * BACKEND_OUTPUT: The tensor in the response of a backend.

## Opentelemetry trace support

Triton provides an option to generate and export traces 
using [Opentelemetry APIs and SDKs](https://opentelemetry.io/). 

To specify Opentelemetry mode for tracing, specify the `--trace-config` flag as follows:

```
$ tritonserver --trace-config=mode=opentelemetry --trace-config=opentelemetry,url=<endpoint> ...
```

> ### Opentelemetry trace APIs settings

Reviewer 3: "Opentelemetry" -> "OpenTelemetry" here and everywhere.

Author: Updated

    scheduling.

  * BACKEND_OUTPUT: The tensor in the response of a backend.

## OpenTelemetry trace support

Triton provides an option to generate and export traces 
using [OpenTelemetry APIs and SDKs](https://opentelemetry.io/). 

To specify OpenTelemetry mode for tracing, specify the `--trace-config` 
flag as follows:

```
$ tritonserver --trace-config mode=opentelemetry \
    --trace-config opentelemetry,url=<endpoint> ...
```

### OpenTelemetry trace APIs settings

The following table shows available OpenTelemetry trace APIs settings for 
`--trace-config opentelemetry,<setting>=<value>`.
<table>
  <thead>
  <tr>
    <th>Setting</th>
    <th>Default Value</th>
    <th>Description</th>
  </tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr>
    <td><code>url</code></td>
    <td><code>0.0.0.0:4318/v1/traces</code></td>
    <td>
      <code>host:port</code> to which the receiver is going to receive 

>       trace data.

Reviewer: nit: The user isn't supposed to specify the route `/v1/traces/` part, are they? If not, make the default value in the table for `url` `0.0.0.0:4318` and note in the description that `/v1/traces` will be called at this `url`

Author: I think it would be better to report default value the same as OpenTelemetry has for HTTP exporter:
https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-cpp/blob/v1.8.3/exporters/otlp/src/otlp_environment.cc#L139

I can add clarification that `/v1/traces` is not strongly required, for example?

Author: Also link to OTLP README, which I would like to follow for the default values: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-cpp/tree/v1.8.3/exporters/otlp#configuration-options--otlp-http-exporter-

Let me know what you think.

Author: `/v1/traces` won't be added to provided url - it wasn't added in my test, so I just collected on some port without `/v1/traces`. So if `url` is provided, it will be used as is. `/v1/traces` is added if environment variable `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_ENDPOINT` is set: https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-cpp/blob/v1.8.3/exporters/otlp/src/otlp_environment.cc#L153
